feat: How-to docs for otelcol dropping telemetry and tiering processors (#93)
canonical/observability-stack: docs/how-to/chaining-otelcols.md

Reviewer: This is turning out to be an excellent doc and I think it would be even more valuable if we include a `juju export-bundle` as a reproducer. Wdyt?

# Tier the OpenTelemetry Collector with different pipelines per data stream

> The upstream OpenTelemetry Collector (otelcol) supports a wide range of [architectures](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/architecture/). The [charmed version](https://charmhub.io/opentelemetry-collector-k8s) is opinionated and configures a receiver or exporter, depending on whether the juju relation sources or sinks telemetry, respectively. When multiple relations exist, all data goes from all receivers to all exporters. Since the charm manages the oltecol config file, only offering the [processors](https://charmhub.io/opentelemetry-collector-k8s/configurations?channel=2/edge#processors) config option to interface with it, a configuration limitation exists. This is solved by tiering otelcols in data streams which require unique processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By design, [charmed OpenTelemetry Collector](https://charmhub.io/opentelemetry-collector-k8s) forwards all receivers to all exporters.
For this reason, in order to mimic the wide range of [architectures](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/architecture/) that the pipeline config support,
multiple OpenTelemetry Collector charms may need to be deployed in a tiered topology.
One such use case is for processing data differently per receiver.
```

## Tiering outgoing data streams

> One imaginable scenario is splitting a log stream into [hot and cold data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_data) based on log levels. The `batching` otelcol collects logs directly from `Flog` with a [batch processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/batchprocessor/README.md) to improve the efficiency of both exported log streams via compression. Low-severity levels like `DEBUG` and `INFO` often have a greater frequency in log streams and indicate normal workload operation. This can be filtered out in a log stream which is sent to long-term (cold) storage to minimize cost while maintaining compliance. For compliance reasons we may also want to implement a [redaction processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/redactionprocessor/README.md) for removing sensitive production data. Alternatively, the hot storage could include `INFO` logs, since storage is less costly, while filtering out `DEBUG` logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One imaginable scenario is splitting a log stream into [hot and cold data](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cold_data) based on log levels. The `batching` otelcol collects logs directly from an application with a [batch processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/blob/main/processor/batchprocessor/README.md) to improve the efficiency of both exported log streams via compression. Low-severity levels like `DEBUG` and `INFO` often have a greater frequency in log streams and indicate normal workload operation. This can be filtered out in a log stream which is sent to long-term (cold) storage to minimize cost while maintaining compliance. For compliance reasons we may also want to implement a [redaction processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/redactionprocessor/README.md) for removing sensitive production data. Conversely, the hot storage could include `INFO` logs, since storage is short-term, while still filtering out `DEBUG` logs.
```

Reviewer: We should start enforcing line length limits on md files 😅

To understand how to filter telemetry with otelcol, refer to the [selectively drop telemetry](selectively-drop-telemetry) documentation or see the [examples for log-level filtering](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/filterprocessor/testdata/config_logs_min_severity.yaml).

```{mermaid}
flowchart TB

flog[Flog] --> fan-out
fan-out["Otel-collector<br>(batching)"]
fan-out --> warn
fan-out --> info
warn["Otel-collector<br>(info filter)"] --> redact

> redact["Otel-collector<br>(redaction)"] --> loki-cold

Reviewer: Would we be unintentionally giving here an impression that we need otelcol per processor?

info["Otel-collector<br>(debug filter)"] --> loki-hot
loki-hot["Loki<br>(hot storage)"]
loki-cold["Loki<br>(cold storage)"]

class fan-out,redact,warn,info thickStroke;
classDef thickStroke stroke-width:2px, stroke:#FFA500;

> ```

Reviewer: Should we stick to precise charmhub names, for example:

```mermaid
flowchart TD

batch["Batching<br>(openteleemtry-collector)"]
filter["Debug filter<br>(openteleemtry-collector)"]
batch --> filter
```

### Hot storage processor config
```yaml
filter/include:
  logs:
    include:
      severity_number:
        min: "INFO"
        match_undefined: true

> ```

Reviewer: Should we mention `juju config` here?

```{note}
This filters out all logs below "INFO" level (the whole DEBUG and TRACE ranges). Logs with no defined severity will also be matched.
```

### Cold storage processor config
```yaml
filter/include:
  logs:
    include:
      severity_number:
        min: "WARN"
        match_undefined: true
```

## Tiering incoming data streams
Another imaginable scenario is classifying log streams prior to ingestion in a common storage destination. Each `Flog` log source has unique downstream data processing, useful for environment classification and identification. Both datastream benefit from the `batching` otelcol. Additionally, both data streams have an [attributes processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/attributesprocessor/README.md), uniquely configured, to classify the logging source environment. Finally, only the production data stream uses the redaction processor for compliance reasons.

```{mermaid}
flowchart TB

flog-dev["Flog<br>(dev)"] --> dev-attr
dev-attr["Otel-collector<br>(prod attributes)"] --> fan-in

flog-prod["Flog<br>(prod)"] --> prod-attr
prod-attr["Otel-collector<br>(dev attributes)"] --> redact

> fan-in["Otel-collector<br>(batching)"] --> loki[Loki]

Reviewer: Realistically we don't need this separate batching otelcol because the other two can be related to loki directly.
Can you think of another processor we could add here that would justify fanning in?

Author: Batching is generally always a good idea. I think it is fair to say that instead of relating the other two directly to Loki that there is a fan-in batching otelcol. Otherwise each otelcol would need their own batching config and duplicates config
